The Leopard
I first saw the leopard when I was crossing the small stream at the bottom of the hill.
The ravine was so deep that for most of the day it remained in shadow. This encouraged many
birds and animals to emerge from cover during daylight hours. Few people ever passed that way:
only milkmen and charcoal-burners from the surrounding villages.
As a result, the ravine had become a little haven of wildlife, one of the few natural sanctuaries left
near Mussoorie, a hill station in northern India.
Below my cottage was a forest of oak and maple and Himalayan rhododendron. A narrow path
twisted its way down through the trees, over an open ridge where red sorrel grew wild, and then
steeply down through a tangle of wild raspberries, creeping vines and slender bamboo.
At the bottom of the hill the path led on to a grassy verge, surrounded by wild dog roses. (It is
surprising how closely the flora of the lower Himalayas, between 5,000 to 8,000 feet, resembles that
of the English countryside).
The stream ran close by the verge, tumbling over smooth pebbles, over rocks worn yellow with
age, on its way to the plains and to the little Song River and finally to the sacred Ganges.
When I first discovered the stream it was early April and the wild roses were flowering — small
white blossoms lying in clusters.
I walked down to the stream almost every day, after two or three hours of writing. I had lived in
cities too long, and had returned to the hills to renew myself, both physically and mentally. Once you
have lived with mountains for any length of time, you belong to them, and must return again and again.
Nearly every morning, and sometimes during the day, I heard the cry of the barking deer. And in the
evening, walking through the forest, I disturbed parties of pheasant. The birds went gliding down the
ravine on open, motionless wings. I saw pine martens and a handsome red fox, and I recognized the
footprints of a bear.
As I had not come to take anything from the forest, the birds and animals soon grew accustomed to
my presence; or possibly they recognized my footsteps. After some time, my approach did not disturb
them.
The langurs in the oak and rhododendron trees, who would at first go leaping through the branches
at my approach, now watched me with some curiosity as they munched the tender green shoots of the
oak.
The young ones scuffled and wrestled like boys, while their parents groomed each other’s coats,
stretching themselves out on the sunlit hillside. But one evening, as I passed, I heard them chattering
in the trees, and I knew I was not the cause of their excitement.
As I crossed the stream and began climbing the hill, the grunting and chattering increased, as though
the langurs were trying to warn me of some hidden danger. A shower of pebbles came rattling down
the steep hillside, and I looked up to see a sinewy, orange-gold leopard poised on a rock about 20
feet above me.
It was not looking towards me, but had its head thrust attentively forward, in the direction of the
ravine. Yet it must have sensed my presence, because it slowly turned its head and looked down at
me.
It seemed a little puzzled at my presence there; and when, to give myself courage, I clapped my
hands sharply, the leopard sprang away into the thickets, making absolutely no sound as it melted into
the shadows.
I had disturbed the animal in its quest for food. But a little after I heard the quickening cry of a
barking deer as it fled through the forest. The hunt was still on.
The leopard, like other members of the cat family, is nearing extinction in India, and I was
surprised to find one so close to Mussoorie. Probably the deforestation that had been taking place in
the surrounding hills had driven the deer into this green valley; and the leopard, naturally, had
followed.
It was some weeks before I saw the leopard again, although I was often made aware of its
presence. A dry, rasping cough sometimes gave it away. At times I felt almost certain that I was being
followed.
Once, when I was late getting home, and the brief twilight gave way to a dark, moonless night, I
was startled by a family of porcupines running about in a clearing. I looked around nervously, and
saw two bright eyes staring at me from a thicket. I stood still, my heart banging away against my ribs.
Then the eyes danced away, and I realized that they were only fireflies.
In May and June, when the hills were brown and dry, it was always cool and green near the stream,
where ferns and maidenhair and long grasses continued to thrive.
Downstream I found a small pool where I could bathe, and a cave with water dripping from the
roof, the water spangled gold and silver in the shafts of sunlight that pushed through the slits in the
cave roof.
‘He maketh me to lie down in green pastures: he leadeth me beside the still waters.’ Perhaps David
had discovered a similar paradise when he wrote those words; perhaps I, too, would write good
words. The hill station’s summer visitors had not discovered this haven of wild and green things. I
was beginning to feel that the place belonged to me, that dominion was mine.
The stream had at least one other regular visitor, a spotted forktail, and though it did not fly away at
my approach it became restless if I stayed too long, and then it would move from boulder to boulder
uttering a long complaining cry.
I spent an afternoon trying to discover the bird’s nest, which I was certain contained young ones,
because I had seen the forktail carrying grubs in her bill. The problem was that when the bird flew
upstream I had difficulty in following her rapidly enough as the rocks were sharp and slippery.
Eventually I decorated myself with bracken fronds and, after slowly making my way upstream, hid
myself in the hollow stump of a tree at a spot where the forktail often disappeared. I had no intention
of robbing the bird: I was simply curious to see its home.
By crouching down, I was able to command a view of a small stretch of the stream and the sides of
the ravine; but I had done little to deceive the forktail, who continued to object strongly to my
presence so near her home.
I summoned up my reserves of patience and sat perfectly still for about ten minutes. The forktail
quietened down. Out of sight, out of mind. But where had she gone? Probably into the walls of the
ravine where I felt sure, she was guarding her nest.
I decided to take her by surprise, and stood up suddenly, in time to see not the forktail on her
doorstep, but the leopard bounding away with a grunt of surprise! Two urgent springs, and it had
crossed the stream and plunged into the forest.
I was as astonished as the leopard, and forgot all about the forktail and her nest. Had the leopard
been following me again? I decided against this possibility. Only man-eaters follow humans, and, as
far as I knew, there had never been a maneater in the vicinity of Mussoorie.
During the monsoon the stream became a rushing torrent, bushes and small trees were swept away,
and the friendly murmur of the water became a threatening boom. I did not visit the place too often, as
there were leeches in the long grass.
One day I found the remains of a barking deer which had only been partly eaten. I wondered why
the leopard had not hidden the rest of his meal, and decided that it must have been disturbed while
eating.
Then, climbing the hill, I met a party of hunters resting beneath the oaks. They asked me if I had
seen a leopard. I said I had not. They said they knew there was a leopard in the forest.
Leopard skins, they told me, were selling in Delhi at over 1,000 rupees each. Of course there was
a ban on the export of skins, but they gave me to understand that there were ways and means … I
thanked them for their information and walked on, feeling uneasy and disturbed.
The hunters had seen the carcass of the deer, and they had seen the leopard’s pug-marks, and they
kept coming to the forest. Almost every evening I heard their guns banging away; for they were ready
to fire at almost anything.
‘There’s a leopard about,’ they always told me. ‘You should carry a gun.’
‘I don’t have one,’ I said.
There were fewer birds to be seen, and even the langurs had moved on. The red fox did not show
itself; and the pine martens, who had become quite bold, now dashed into hiding, at my approach. The
smell of one human is like the smell of any other.
And then the rains were over and it was October; I could lie in the sun, on sweet-smelling grass,
and gaze up through a pattern of oak leaves into a blinding blue heaven. And I would praise God for
leaves and grass and the smell of things, the smell of mint and bruised clover, and the touch of things
— the touch of grass and air and sky, the touch of the sky’s blueness.
I thought no more of the men. My attitude towards them was similar to that of the denizens of the
forest. These were men, unpredictable, and to be avoided if possible.
On the other side of the ravine rose Pari Tibba, Hill of the Fairies: a bleak, scrub-covered hill
where no one lived.
It was said that in the previous century Englishmen had tried building their houses on the hill, but
the area had always attracted lightning, due to either the hill’s location or due to its mineral deposits;
after several houses had been struck by lightning, the settlers had moved on to the next hill, where the
town now stands.
To the hillmen it is Pari Tibba, haunted by the spirits of a pair of ill-fated lovers who perished
there in a storm; to others it is known as Burnt Hill, because of its scarred and stunted trees.
One day, after crossing the stream, I climbed Pari Tibba — a stiff undertaking, because there was
no path to the top and I had to scramble up a precipitous rock-face with the help of rocks and roots
that were apt to come loose in my groping hand.
But at the top was a plateau with a few pine trees, their upper branches catching the wind and
humming softly. There I found the ruins of what must have been the houses of the first settlers —just a
few piles of ubble, now overgrown with weeds, sorrel, dandelions and nettles.
As I walked through the roofless ruins, I was struck by the silence that surrounded me, the absence
of birds and animals, the sense of complete desolation.
The silence was so absolute that it seemed to be ringing in my ears. But there was something else
of which I was becoming increasingly aware: the strong feline odour of one of the cat family.
I paused and looked about. I was alone. There was no movement of dry leaf or loose stone. The
ruins were for the most part open to the sky. Their rotting rafters had collapsed, jamming together to
form a low passage like the entrance to a mine; and this dark cavern seemed to lead down into the
ground.
The smell was stronger when I approached this spot, so I stopped again and waited there,
wondering if I had discovered the lair of the leopard, wondering if the animal was now at rest after a
night’s hunt.
Perhaps he was crouching there in the dark, watching me, recognizing me, knowing me as the man
who walked alone in the forest without a weapon.
I like to think that he was there, that he knew me, and that he acknowledged my visit in the
friendliest way: by ignoring me altogether.
Perhaps I had made him confident — too confident, too careless, too trusting of the human in his
midst. I did not venture any further; I was not out of my mind. I did not seek physical contact, or even
another glimpse of that beautiful sinewy body, springing from rock to rock. It was his trust I wanted,
and I think he gave it to me.
But did the leopard, trusting one man, make the mistake of bestowing his trust on others? Did I, by
casting out all fear — my own fear, and the leopard’s protective fear — leave him defenseless?
Because next day, coming up the path from the stream, shouting and beating drums, were the
hunters. They had a long bamboo pole across their shoulders; and slung from the pole, feet up, head
down, was the lifeless body of the leopard, shot in the neck and in the head.
‘We told you there was a leopard!’ they shouted, in great good humour. ‘Isn’t he a fine specimen?’
‘Yes,’ I said. ‘He was a beautiful leopard.’
I walked home through the silent forest. It was very silent, almost as though the birds and animals
knew that their trust had been violated.
I remembered the lines of a poem by D.H. Lawrence; and, as I climbed the steep and lonely path to
my home, the words beat out their rhythm in my mind: ‘There was room in the world for a mountain
lion and me.’
